Blog post on deploying to OpenFaaS with GitHub Actions (#191)
openfaas/openfaas.github.io: _posts/2020-09-19-github-actions-with-faasd.md

---

> title: "Github Actions for OpenFaas functions with faasd"

Reviewer: Thinking about the audience for this. Is anything specific to faasd, or can this be about OpenFaaS with brief notes where minor things diverge?

Author: I want it to be specific to faasd, maybe adding an update showcasing the logs, with how the function gets rebuilt, by adding a log statement to the handler?

Reviewer: Given that this blog post isn't really about faasd, and that it is using normal OpenFaaS APIs, I would prefer to see it made more generic: `Deploying to OpenFaaS with GitHub Actions` for instance

```

## Create an OpenFaaS function
Now that we've logged into faasd with faas-cli, we're ready to deploy functions to it.
I'm going to deploy a golang function for this tutorial.
```sh
# create a new directory for our project
mkdir faasd-hello
# pull golang-http templates
faas-cli template store pull golang-http
# create a new function with faas-cli
faas-cli new faasd-hello --lang golang-http --prefix utsavanand2
```

If you look into the root directory of the project, faas-cli has created two additional files:

```
./faasd-hello/handler.go
./faasd-hello.yml
```

The content of our handler looks something like this:
![./faasd-hello/handler.go](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/handler-go.jpg)

The YAML file is used to configure the deployment and the build and runtime environment of the function
~[./faasd-hello.yml](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/faasd-hello-yaml.jpg)

## Setup a workflow file for Github Actions
In the root directory of the project run:

```sh
mkdir -p .github/workflows
nano ./github/workflows/main.yml
```

And paste in the following contents into main.yml file
```yaml
name: CI-CD

on:
  push:
    branches: 
      - master

jobs:

>   func-build:

Reviewer: How does this compare to what @LucasRoesler wrote?

Were you not able to use the workflow from Crazy Max that I advised you to look at?

https://github.com/crazy-max/ghaction-docker-buildx

Author: IMHO we should have a blog post on Multi arch builds with buildx in the next blog post.
I've looked at Lucas's post, and he is using his own GitHub Action that he has built, which has the faas-cli version hard-coded. Whereas I'm using the docker container for faas-cli, making it easier to switch versions of the cli.

Reviewer 2: I would recommend just using the published faas-cli docker image (as it is written here), it didn't exist when i wrote my post

![secrets](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/secrets.jpg)

## Push the repo to Github to trigger Github Actions
```sh
git push -u origin master
```

## Check the status of your Github Actions build

Under the `Actions` tab we can check the status of the workflow

![workflow](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/workflow.jpg)

Since we have successfully built and deployed our functions let's invoke it

## Invoke the function with curl

```sh
curl -d "Hello from faasd" http://$IP:8080/function/faasd-hello
```

![curl](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/curl.jpg)

## Closing thoughts

OpenFaaS is best run on Kubernetes with faas-netes, but for smaller teams who want to jump on the serverless train and don't want to deal with the complexity of Kubernetes, faasd can be the obvious choice for them and with tools like Github Actions, repetitive tasks of testing, building, and deploying to OpenFaaS can be done with a simple `git push`

# Take it further

> You can take this to the next level by running faasd on a Raspberry Pi and exposing it with [inlets](https://docs.inlets.dev) and leverage multi-arch builds with Docker's [Buildx](https://docs.docker.com/buildx/working-with-buildx/) with Github Actions.

Reviewer: Explain how

Author: I was thinking of doing the same in the next blog post dedicated to multi-arch, and have a workflow that with a single build, deploys the same function at two places - one to my RPi (arm) k3s OpenFaas running faas-netes and another running as a faasd instance (amd64)

---
title: "Github Actions for OpenFaas functions with faasd"

> description: "Bring CI-CD with Github Actions to your OpenFaaS functions running on a faasd appliance"

Reviewer: `CI/CD`

date: 2020-09-19
image: /images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/lego.jpg
categories:
  - faasd
  - containerd
  - cicd
  - github
author_staff_member: utsav
dark_background: true
---

Learn how to bring CI-CD to your OpenFaaS functions running on a faasd appliance with Github Actions

## A few words about faasd

> OpenFaaS when came into existence gave the promise of giving users freedom to run their serverless functions anywhere, be it on a Raspberry Pi, in a data center or in the cloud. As of today OpenFaaS offers faas-netes to run OpenFaaS on Kubernetes, which is the recommended way to run OpenFaaS when running your functions in production.

Reviewer 2: the opening seems to be jumbled
>OpenFaaS when came into existence gave the promise of giving users freedom 

I think you mean

> OpenFaaS was created to have the freedom to run serverless functions anywhere, be it on a Raspberry Pi, in a data center, or the cloud. This started with faas-swarm to run on Docker Swarm and faas-netes to run on Kubernetes. faas-netes is the current recommendation for running OpenFaaS in production. 
>
> Although it's not necessary ...

Author: Yes it definitely sounds much better.

Though, it's not necessary that you might want or even infact need Kubernetes, especially when considering the complexities involved with managing a Kubernetes cluster, and that's how faasd was born.
faasd is just like OpenFaaS with the same ecosystem but it spares you from the complexity involved that comes with mangaging a distributed system.

In this tutorial, we'll see how we can get OpenFaaS functions up and running on a faasd appliance with Github Actions.

## Prerequisites

* A VM exposed to the Internet

For this tutorial we'll be using a [DigitalOcean](https://digitalocean.com/) Droplet.

* faas-cli

faas-cli is a command line tool used to interact with OpenFaaS, from deploying your functions to viewing logs.

> Get the installation instructions [here](https://docs.openfaas.com/cli/install/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Follow the installation instructions [here](https://docs.openfaas.com/cli/install/)
```

> You can follow along with the code used in this tutorial from this [repo](https://github.com/utsavanand2/faasd-hello)

> ## Create a Droplet with faasd

Reviewer: Please skip this section and point to https://docs.openfaas.com/deployment to avoid duplication (which has to be maintained) and to give the users the option to pick whatever they want.

Create a DigitalOcean Droplet with a Ubuntu distribution, with any plan according to what you want to run, faasd being light weight I'm going to use the $5 basic plan.

![Choose a distribution and a plan](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/choose-distro.jpg)

Under `Select additional options`, select `User data` and paste in the contents of the cloud-config file from [here](https://github.com/openfaas/faasd/blob/master/cloud-config.txt)

![Select additional options](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/additional-options-cloud-config.jpg)

![faasd droplet](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/faasd-droplet.jpg)

Within as little as 30 seconds, your faasd instance will be up and running.

> ## Get the OpenFaaS gateway password

Reviewer: Skip this section, the user will have already logged in.

Get the gateway password by running the following commands

```sh
export IP="143.110.184.36"
export PASSWORD=$(ssh root@$IP "sudo cat /var/lib/faasd/secrets/basic-auth-password")
```

Assuming that you have faas-cli already installed, login to faasd with faas-cli with the following commands

```sh
export OPENFAAS_URL=http://$IP:8080
echo $PASSWORD | faas-cli login --password-stdin -u admin -g $OPENFAAS_URL
```

> ## Create an OpenFaaS function

Reviewer: faasd-hello -> `go-function`

> Now that we've logged into faasd with faas-cli, we're ready to deploy functions to it.

Reviewer 2: You have the word deploy very close together here, it might read a little better if you don't user "deploy" in the first sentence, for example.
```suggestion
Now that we've logged into faasd with faas-cli, we're ready to run our functions.
```

Author: Thank you so much @LucasRoesler for such a thorough review ❤️
I'll make all the suggested changes.

I'm going to deploy a golang function for this tutorial.

```sh
# create a new directory for our project
mkdir faasd-hello
# pull golang-http templates
faas-cli template store pull golang-http
# create a new function with faas-cli

> faas-cli new faasd-hello --lang golang-http --prefix utsavanand2

Reviewer: Is `--prefix` needed if the build uses shrinkwrap?

Author: Yes! That is redundant.

```

If you look into the root directory of the project, faas-cli has created two additional files:

```
./faasd-hello/handler.go
./faasd-hello.yml
```

The content of our handler looks something like this:
![./faasd-hello/handler.go](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/handler-go.jpg)

The YAML file is used to configure the deployment and the build and runtime environment of the function
~[./faasd-hello.yml](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/faasd-hello-yaml.jpg)

## Setup a workflow file for Github Actions

In the root directory of the project run:

```sh
mkdir -p .github/workflows
nano ./github/workflows/main.yml
```

And paste in the following contents into main.yml file

```yaml
name: CI-CD

on:
  push:
    branches: 
      - master

jobs:
  func-build:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - 
        name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v2
      -

>         name: Pull template

Reviewer 2: can this be simplified to this

```yaml
- name: Pull template
  uses: docker://openfaas/faas-cli:latest
  run: faas-cli template store pull golang-http
```

Per these docs https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#example-using-a-docker-hub-action

Since it has an entrypoint in that image it might be

```yaml
- name: Pull template
  uses: docker://openfaas/faas-cli:latest
  run: template store pull golang-http
```

Reviewer 2: Based on this https://docs.github.com/en/actions/reference/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobsjob_idstepswithargs 

it seems like you can also do something like

```yaml
- name: Pull template
  uses: docker://openfaas/faas-cli:latest
  with:
    entrypoint: faas-cli
    args: template store pull golang-http
```

Author: Thanks @LucasRoesler! This looks way more simplified. I'll try it out now.

Author: It looks like we need to mount the volume inside our docker container to the runner's directory, for it to detect the pulled templates, I fear we'll face the same problem when we use `faas login`. This was the reason why I had to mount the volumes for the build to be sucessful, and if we go down that path, then all of those `chown` commands will have to be used again.
<img width="1668" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-23 at 10 38 02 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25264581/94046288-1c79a780-fdee-11ea-89ab-d8490ae17b32.png">
I also found [this](https://github.community/t/bind-mount-additional-volumes-for-image-in-github-action/17867) comment telling it's not possible at the moment.
Are you aware of any options that might help us with this @LucasRoesler?
If not do you think we should just use the default CLI and use the `docker` with `chown` only where we need to build the function image?

Author: We can also fork your current [OpenFaaS Github Action](https://github.com/LucasRoesler/openfaas-action) to the official OpenFaaS repo and try to keep it maintained with new faas-cli releases?

Reviewer 2: Forking and updating an official action would be pretty nice, especially if we can design it so that we just pass arguments to faas-cli instead of trying to create a action for every command

This approach of installing the cli could also be really good https://github.com/marketplace/actions/setup-hub

        run: |
          docker run --rm -v `pwd`:`pwd` -w `pwd` \

>           openfaas/faas-cli:latest-root \

Reviewer: Why run as root?

          template store pull golang-http
      - 
        name: Running faas-cli skrinkwrap build
        run: |
          docker run --rm -v `pwd`:`pwd` -w `pwd` \
          openfaas/faas-cli:latest-root \
          build -f faasd-hello.yml --shrinkwrap
      -

>         name: Login to DockerHub

Reviewer: I would rather see you use the GitHub container registry for this ghcr.io because the Docker Hub is going over to a charging model and GitHub is free, and supports private containers.

        if: success()
        uses: docker/login-action@v1
        with:
          username: ${{ secrets.DOCKER_USERNAME }}
          password: ${{ secrets.DOCKER_PASSWORD }}
      - 
        name: Login to OpenFaaS Gateway
        run: |
          docker run --rm -v $HOME:/root -w $HOME \
          openfaas/faas-cli:latest-root \
          login \
          -p ${{ secrets.OPENFAAS_GATEWAY_PASSWD }} \
          -g ${{ secrets.OPENFAAS_GATEWAY }} \
          && \
          sudo chown $USER:$USER -R $HOME/.openfaas && \
          ls -lah $HOME
      - 
        name: Build and Push OpenFaaS function
        run: |
          # Update rights of build dir from root to current user \
          # Build and push multi-arch image \

>           sudo chown $USER:$USER -R build/ && \

Reviewer: As a user I would be confused by the amount of times `sudo` is used. Reading the post, I don't understand why this is here, so let's explain it for the user after the workflow with a comment.

Explain why it's needed and what it does.

I'd also like to know if there is a way to avoid this as it makes the use of the Docker image a little messy. Can we have faas-cli login / build write to a custom folder, or can we perform the task in /tmp/?

CC @LucasRoesler for input on resolving the use chown/sudo

Author: Yes I'll add comments to explain why we need it. After experimenting with about a dozen of Github Action builds failing I realised that the `build` and `.openfaas` dir didn't have the owner set to user running the action in the workflow.

          docker build \
          --tag utsavanand2/faasd-hello:latest \
          build/faasd-hello/ && \
          docker push utsavanand2/faasd-hello:latest
      - 

>         name: Deploying OpenFaaS function to your faasd appliance

Reviewer: `Deploying *the* OpenFaaS function`

git add .
git commit -m "Initial Commit"
```

Create a Github Repo named faasd-hello and add the following secrets and their values to the repo for Github Actions to build push and deploy your OpenFaaS functions. Make sure that the secret names correspond with those defined in the github workflow YAML file as defined above.

![secrets](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/secrets.jpg)

## Push the repo to Github to trigger Github Actions

```sh
git push -u origin master
```

## Check the status of your Github Actions build

Under the `Actions` tab we can check the status of the workflow

![workflow](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/workflow.jpg)

Since we have successfully built and deployed our functions let's invoke it

## Invoke the function with curl

```sh
curl -d "Hello from faasd" http://$IP:8080/function/faasd-hello
```

![curl](/images/2020-09-19-github-actions-faasd/curl.jpg)

## Update handler to log

Let's update the handler to add a `log` statement to log the request received in the `body`.

```go
log.Printf("received request: %v\n", req.Body)
```

In the root directory of the project, run

```sh
git add .
git commit -m "add log statement"
git push
```

> This should trigger a new build in Github Actions, and deploy your updated function to faasd.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This should trigger a new build in Github Actions and deploy your updated function to faasd.
```
